{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1265\cocoasubrtf210
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww10800\viewh8400\viewkind0
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural

\f0\fs24 \cf0 I decided to work with Sam\'92s project because I found the use of scaled, repetitive images as a tool for comparison to be conceptually compelling and beautiful aesthetically. I have been reading the NYT for a while now and the imagery in it has changed drastically! There used to be few images. Author head shots were given more prominence. Images play a vital role (in my opinion) in transmitting information to readers. I thought that cataloguing this shift might yield some interesting results.\
\
I began working with \'91toy gun\'92 and \'91riot gear\'92 because I thought I should at least try to stay true to Sam\'92s project. It was startling how much the images for the two words have in common. In the context of this project, without quantities and $ to compare, the effect wasn\'92t really meaningful to me so I decided to pursue a different direction. One interesting thing to note is that the results for these violence-related terms heavily favored the fall. It\'92s probably a strange coincidence but am interested in looking further into patterns of violence as portrayed seasonally in the news.\
\
The backup plan that I had in mind for this image pattern thing was to search for common textile pattern types and to then use the results to abstract a reinterpretation of the pattern. I chose pattern types that are common (according to wikipedia) but whose names have specificity (stripes wouldn\'92t work well for this). Gingham, herringbone, houndstooth, paisley, and toile worked well. Each image is scaled according to how much the term appeared in that year and then repeated across the row. I then brought the resulting images into illustrator and simplified (heavily processed) the images to create sets of black + white and 6-color images.}